Blog post - Moving from ruby to rust blog post (#199)
deliveroo/deliveroo.engineering: _posts/2019-01-28-moving-from-ruby-to-rust.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Moving from Ruby to Rust"
authors:
  - "Andrii Dmytrenko"
excerpt: >
  How we migrated our Tier 1 service from ruby to rust and didn't break production
---

## Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

1. Automatic Table of Contents Here
{:toc}

## Background

> In logistics algorithms team, we have a service, called dispatcher, main purpose of which is to assign orders to riders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In logistics algorithms team, we have a service, called dispatcher, the main purpose of which is to assign orders to riders.
```

> For each rider we build a timeline, where we predict where riders will be at a certain point of time,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each rider we build a timeline, where we predict where riders will be at a certain point of time;
```

knowing this, we can more efficiently assign rider to order.

Building each timeline involves a fair bit of computation: using different machine learning models to predict how long events will take,
asserting certain constraints, calculating assignment cost. The computations themselves are quick, but the problem is that we need to do a lot of them: for each order, we need to go over all available riders to determine which assignment would be the best.

First version of the dispatcher was written mainly in Ruby: this was a go-to language in the company, and it was performing adequately at that time. But as Deliveroo kept growing, increasing number of orders and riders, we saw that
the dispatch process started taking much longer than before and we realised, that at some point it will be impossible to

> dispatch some zones within a time constraint that we put in place. We also knew that is was limiting us if we decided to implement more advanced algorithms, which would require even more computation time.

Reviewer: I would avoid mentioning zones:
```suggestion
dispatch some areas within a time constraint that we put in place. We also knew that is was limiting us if we decided to implement more advanced algorithms, which would require even more computation time.
```

> First thing we tried was to optimise the current code (cache some computations, try to find a bug in the algorithms),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing we tried was to optimise the current code (cache some computations, try to find a bug in the algorithms),
```

which didn't help much. It was clear that ruby was a bottleneck here and we started looking at the alternatives.

## Why we decided to go with rust

We considered several alternatives of how we can solve the problem:

* choose a new programming language with better performance characteristics and rewrite the dispatcher
* identify biggest bottlenecks, rewrite those parts of the code and somehow integrate them in the current code

We knew that rewriting something from scratch can be risky and we didn't feel quite comfortable with this approach.

> Another option, finding bottlenecks and replacing them was something that we did already for one part of the code (we built a native extension gem for the Hungarian route matching algorithm, implemented in Rust), and that worked well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another option, finding bottlenecks and replacing them, was something that we did already for one part of the code (we built a native extension gem for the Hungarian route matching algorithm, implemented in Rust), and that worked well.
```

We decided to try this approach.

There were several options how we could integrate parts of the code written in another language to work with ruby:
* build an external service and provide an API to communicate with
* build a native extension

We quickly discarded an option to build an external service, because either we would need to call this
external service hundreds thousand times per dispatch cycle and the overhead of the communication would detriment all the potential
speed gains, or we would need to reimplement a big part of the dispatcher inside this service, which is almost the same as a complete rewrite.

> We decided that it has to be some sort of native extension, and for that, we decided to use rust, as it ticked most of the boxes for us:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided that it has to be some sort of native extension, and for that, we decided to use Rust, as it ticked most of the boxes for us:
```

* it has high performance (comparable to C)
* it is memory safe
* it can be used to build dynamic libraries, which can be loaded into Ruby (using extern "C" interface)

> Some of our team members had experience with rust and liked the language, also one part of the dispatcher was already using rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of our team members had experience with Rust and liked the language, also one part of the dispatcher was already using Rust.
```

Our strategy was to replace current ruby implementation gradually, by replacing parts of the algorithm one by one.

> It was possible because we could implement separate methods and classes in rust and call them from Ruby without a big overhead of cross-language interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was possible because we could implement separate methods and classes in Rust and call them from Ruby without a big overhead of cross-language interaction.
```

> ## How we made ruby talk to rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How we made Ruby talk to Rust
```

> There a few different ways you can call rust from ruby:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There a few different ways you can call Rust from Ruby:
```

> * write a dynamic library in rust with `extern "C"` interface and call it using FFI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* write a dynamic library in Rust with `extern "C"` interface and call it using FFI.
```

> * write a dynamic library, but use ruby API to register methods, so that you can call them from ruby directly, just like any other ruby code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* write a dynamic library, but use Ruby API to register methods, so that you can call them from Ruby directly, just like any other Ruby code.
```

> First approach, using FFI would require us to come up with some custom C like interfaces in both rust and ruby and then create wrappers for them in both languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First approach, using FFI would require us to come up with some custom C like interfaces in both Rust and Ruby and then create wrappers for them in both languages.
```

> Second approach, using ruby API sounded more promising, as there were already libraries to make our lives easier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second approach, using Ruby API, sounded more promising, as there were already libraries to make our lives easier:
```

* ruru/rutie
* Helix

> We tried Helix first, it has macros, which looks like writing Ruby in Rust (it was a bit too magical for us than we found comfortable) and it also assumed your ruby app was Rails (at least by looking at the Readme).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We tried Helix first: it has macros which look like writing Ruby in Rust, which was a bit more magical for us than we found comfortable; and it also assumed your Ruby app was Rails (at least by looking at the Readme).
```
Can we elaborate on this? "at least by looking at the Readme" doesn't make this sound like we put much due diligence into this!q

Eventually, we decided to go with ruru/rutie, but keep ruby layer thin and isolated so that we could possibly switch in the future.

> [Rutie](https://crates.io/crates/rutie) is a fork of [Ruru](https://crates.io/crates/ruru), but it looks like ruru's development was stagnated, and it wasn't accepting new PRs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Rutie](https://crates.io/crates/rutie) is a fork of [Ruru](https://crates.io/crates/ruru) (it looks like ruru's development had stagnated, and it wasn't accepting new PRs).
```

    pub city: String,
}

class!(User);

impl VerifiedObject for User {
    fn is_correct_type<T: Object>(object: &T) -> bool {
        object.send("class").send("name").try_convert_to::<RString>().to_string() == "User"
    }

    fn error_message() -> &'static str {
        "Not a valid request"
    }
}

methods!(
    // .. some code skipped

    fn hello(user: AnyObject) -> Boolean {
        let name = user.send("name").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let ruby_address = user.send("address");
        let country = ruby_address.send("country").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let city = ruby_address.send("city").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let address = Address {
            country,
            city
        };
        let rust_user = RustUser {
            name,
            address
        };
        do_something_with_user(&rust_user);
        Boolean::new(true)
    }
)
```

You can see a lot of routine and repetitive code here, there's also missing proper error handling.
After looking at this code, it reminded us that this looks a lot like some manual parsing of something like JSON or similar.

> You _could_ instead serialize objects in ruby to JSON and then parse it in Rust, and it works mostly OK, but you still need to implement JSON serializers in Ruby.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You _could_ instead serialize objects in Ruby to JSON and then parse it in Rust, and it works mostly OK, but you still need to implement JSON serializers in Ruby.
```

Here's the same method, but using our serde deserializer & serializer:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize)]
pub struct User {
    pub name: String,
    pub address: Address,
}

#[derive(Debug, Deserialize)]
pub struct Address {
    pub country: String,
    pub city: String
}

class!(HelloWorld);
rutie_serde_methods!(
    HelloWorld,
    _itself,
    ruby_class!(Exception),

    // Notice that the argument has our defined type `User`, and the return type is plain bool
    fn hello_user(user: User) -> bool {
        do_something_with_user(&user);
        true
    }
);

```

You can see how much simpler the code in `hello_user` is now - we don't need to parse `user` manually anymore.
Since it's serde, it can also handle nested objects (as you can see with the address).
We also added a built-in error handling: if serde fails to "parse" the object, this macro will raise an exception of a class that we provided (`Exception` in this case).

Using [rutie-serde](https://crates.io/crates/rutie-serde/) we could quickly and painlessly implement thin interfaces between ruby and rust.

> ## Moving from ruby to rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Moving from Ruby to Rust
```

> We came up with a plan to gradually replace all parts of the ruby dispatcher with rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We came up with a plan to gradually replace all parts of the Ruby dispatcher with Rust.
```

> We started by replacing with rust classes which didn't have dependencies on other parts of the dispatcher and adding feature flags,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We started by replacing with Rust classes which didn't have dependencies on other parts of the dispatcher and adding feature flags,
```

something similar to this:

```ruby
module TravelTime
  def self.get(from_location, to_location, options)

>     if rust_enabled? && Feature.enabled?(:rust_travel_time) # in the real world the feature flag would be more granular and enable you to A/B test

Reviewer: Is A/B test the right term?

Author: I couldn't come up with a better term. Let me think again.

Reviewer 2: When I explained this bit during my talk, I said something like:

> We wrapped each new feature in its own feature flag, and then incrementally rolled out that feature flag.

I think the "incremental roll-out" captures the zone-by-zone bit, without actually using the word "zone".

        RustTravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)
    else
        RubyTravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)
    end
  end
end
```

> There was also a **master switch** (in this case `rust_enabled?`), which allowed us to switch all the rust code off by flipping just one feature flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There was also a **master switch** (in this case `rust_enabled?`), which allowed us to switch all the Rust code off by flipping just one feature flag.
```

> Since the API of both ruby and rust classes implementations remained largely the same, we were able to test both of them using the same tests, which gave us more confidence in the quality of the implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the API of both Ruby and Rust classes implementations remained largely the same, we were able to test both of them using the same tests, which gave us more confidence in the quality of the implementation.
```

```ruby
RSpec.describe TravelTime do
  shared_examples "travel_time" do
    let(:from_location) { build(:location) }
    let(:to_location) { build(:location) }
    let(:options) { build(:travel_time_options) }

    it 'returns correct travel time' do
      expect(TravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)).to eq(123.45)
    end
  end

  context "ruby implementation" do
    before do
      Feature.disable!(:rust_travel_time)
    end

    include "travel_time"
  end

  context "rust implementation" do
    before do
      Feature.enable!(:rust_travel_time)
    end

    include "travel_time"
  end
end
```

> When we moved all the dependencies of some larger part of the code into rust, we could then move the code which was relying on those dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we moved all the dependencies of some larger part of the code into Rust, we could then move the code which was relying on those dependencies:
```

If your `BigModule` had dependencies on `A`, `B`, `C`, where `A` was also dependent on `D`, you would move `D`, then  `A`, and also `B`, `C`, which would be called by `BigModule` from ruby:

```ruby
class BigModule
  def call
    # each of these will call either Ruby or Rust depending on the feature flag
    A.call
    B.call
    C.call
  end
end
```
After `A`, `B`, `C` was moved to rust, it was possible to move `BigModule` itself to rust:

```rust
struct BigModule {
    a: A,
    b: B,
    c: C,
}

impl BigModule {
    pub fn call(&self) -> Result<SomeResult> {
        self.a.call();
        self.b.call();
        self.c.call();
        Ok(some_result)
    }
    //
}
```

Obviously, each of these `call` methods would probably take some arguments and return some results, which `BigModule` would use.

> It was also very important that at any time, we could switch of rust integration and the dispatcher would still work (because we kept ruby implementation along with rust and kept adding feature flags).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was also very important that, at any time, we could switch off the Rust integration and the dispatcher would still work (because we kept the Ruby implementation along with Rust and kept adding feature flags).
```

## How performance was improved

> When moving more larger chunks of code into rust, we noticed increased performance improvements which we were carefully monitoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When moving more larger chunks of code into Rust, we noticed increased performance improvements which we were carefully monitoring.
```

> When moving smaller modules to rust (such as travel time), we didn't expect much of the improvement, in fact, the code might have become slower because of the interaction overhead (we call travel time model hundred thousand times during the dispatch cycle). But after we moved larger modules the performance improvements were obvious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When moving smaller modules to Rust (such as travel time), we didn't expect much improvement: in fact, the code might have become slower because of the interaction overhead (we call travel time model hundreds of thousands of times during the dispatch cycle). But after we moved larger modules the performance improvements were obvious.
```

### Performance numbers

In the dispatcher, there are 3 main phases of the dispatch cycle:

* loading data
* running computation, calculating assignments
* saving/sending assignments

> Loading data and saving data phases scale pretty much linearly depending on the dataset size, while computation phase (which we moved to rust) has an exponential component in it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading data and saving data phases scale pretty much linearly depending on the dataset size, while computation phase (which we moved to Rust) has an exponential component in it.
```
Is it exponential? Or should we say "higher-order polynomial"?

Author: It probably is higher-order polynomial indeed, I think that's what I meant initially.

We are less worried about the loading/saving data phases, and we didn't prioritise speeding up those phases yet.
While still having loading data and sending data back parts of the dispatcher written in Ruby, total dispatch time was significantly reduced: for example, total dispatch time in one of our larger zones dropped from ~4 sec to 0.8 sec.

<figure>
![Total dispatch time](/images/posts/moving-from-ruby-to-rust/total_dispatch_time.png)
</figure>

> Out of those 0.8 seconds, roughly 0.2 seconds were spent in rust, in the computation phase. This means 0.6 second is a ruby/DB overhead of loading data and sending assignments to riders. It looks like the dispatch cycle is only 5 times quicker now, but actually, the computation phase in this example time was reduced from ~3.4sec to 0.2sec, which is 17x speedup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of those 0.8 seconds, roughly 0.2 seconds were spent in Rust, in the computation phase. This means 0.6 second is a Ruby/DB overhead of loading data and sending assignments to riders. It looks like the dispatch cycle is only 5 times quicker now, but actually, the computation phase in this example time was reduced from ~3.4sec to 0.2sec, which is 17x speedup.
```

<figure>
![Computation phase time](/images/posts/moving-from-ruby-to-rust/computation_time.png)
</figure>

> Keep in mind, that rust code is almost a 1:1 copy of the ruby in terms of the implementation, and we didn't add any additional optimisations (like caching, avoiding copying memory in some cases), so there is still room for the improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind, that Rust code is almost a 1:1 copy of the Ruby in terms of the implementation, and we didn't add any additional optimisations (like caching, avoiding copying memory in some cases), so there is still room for the improvement.
```

## Conclusion
Our project of moving from Ruby to Rust was a success and we achieved what we have expected. Because of the gradual migration and having the ability to quickly switch between the implementations, we mitigated most of the risks and it allowed us to deliver this rewrite in smaller parts and under the feature flags, just like any other feature that we build normally in Deliveroo.

> Rust has shown a great performance and the absence of runtime made it easy to use it as a replacement of C in building ruby native extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust has shown a great performance and the absence of runtime made it easy to use it as a replacement of C in building Ruby native extensions.
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Moving from Ruby to Rust"
authors:
  - "Andrii Dmytrenko"
excerpt: >
  How we migrated our Tier 1 service from ruby to rust and didn't break production
---

## Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

1. Automatic Table of Contents Here
{:toc}

## Background

> In logistics algorithms team, we have a service, called dispatcher, the main purpose of which is to assign orders to riders.

Reviewer 2: Minor: capitalise "Logistics Algorithms" and "Dispatcher" throughout the text.

For each rider we build a timeline, where we predict where riders will be at a certain point of time;
knowing this, we can more efficiently assign rider to order.

Building each timeline involves a fair bit of computation: using different machine learning models to predict how long events will take,
asserting certain constraints, calculating assignment cost. The computations themselves are quick, but the problem is that we need to do a lot of them: for each order, we need to go over all available riders to determine which assignment would be the best.

> First version of the dispatcher was written mainly in Ruby: this was a go-to language in the company, and it was performing adequately at that time. But as Deliveroo kept growing, increasing number of orders and riders, we saw that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first version of the Dispatcher was written mainly in Ruby: this was a go-to language in the company, and it was performing adequately given our size at the time. However, as Deliveroo kept growing, the number of orders and riders increaed dramatically, and we saw that
```

> the dispatch process started taking much longer than before and we realised, that at some point it will be impossible to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the dispatch process started taking much longer than before and we realised, that at some point it would be impossible to
```

(but see suggestion below about re-phrasing this sentence)

> dispatch some areas within a time constraint that we put in place. We also knew that is was limiting us if we decided to implement more advanced algorithms, which would require even more computation time.

Reviewer 2: > within a time constraint that we put in place.

This makes the time constraint sound arbitrary (which it is really). Perhaps we could say something like:

 > However, as Deliveroo kept growing, the number of orders and riders increaed dramatically, and we saw that the dispatch process was taking longer and longer to complete. Without changes, the process would no longer complete fast enough. If we were to implement more advanced algorithms, we'd require even more computation time.

The first thing we tried was to optimise the current code (cache some computations, try to find a bug in the algorithms),

> which didn't help much. It was clear that ruby was a bottleneck here and we started looking at the alternatives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which didn't help much. It was clear that Ruby was a bottleneck here and we started looking at the alternatives.
```

> ## Why we decided to go with rust

Reviewer 2: Minor: maybe something as simple as "## Why Rust?"

> We considered several alternatives of how we can solve the problem:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We considered a few approaches to how to solve the problem of dispatch speed:
```

Given the heading of this section, the word "alternatives" makes it sound like we're considering alternatives to Rust specifically.

> * choose a new programming language with better performance characteristics and rewrite the dispatcher

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* choose a new programming language with better performance characteristics and rewrite the Dispatcher
```

* identify biggest bottlenecks, rewrite those parts of the code and somehow integrate them in the current code

> We knew that rewriting something from scratch can be risky and we didn't feel quite comfortable with this approach.

Reviewer 2: This seems quite vague... maybe clarify that it was the risk of introducing bugs that we were uncomfortable with?

Another option, finding bottlenecks and replacing them, was something that we did already for one part of the code (we built a native extension gem for the Hungarian route matching algorithm, implemented in Rust), and that worked well.
We decided to try this approach.

There were several options how we could integrate parts of the code written in another language to work with ruby:
* build an external service and provide an API to communicate with
* build a native extension

We quickly discarded an option to build an external service, because either we would need to call this

> external service hundreds thousand times per dispatch cycle and the overhead of the communication would detriment all the potential

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
external service hundreds thousand times per dispatch cycle and the overhead of the communication would offset all of the potential
```

speed gains, or we would need to reimplement a big part of the dispatcher inside this service, which is almost the same as a complete rewrite.

We decided that it has to be some sort of native extension, and for that, we decided to use Rust, as it ticked most of the boxes for us:

* it has high performance (comparable to C)
* it is memory safe

> * it can be used to build dynamic libraries, which can be loaded into Ruby (using extern "C" interface)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* it can be used to build dynamic libraries, which can be loaded into Ruby (using `extern "C"` interface)
```

Some of our team members had experience with Rust and liked the language, also one part of the dispatcher was already using Rust.
Our strategy was to replace current ruby implementation gradually, by replacing parts of the algorithm one by one.
It was possible because we could implement separate methods and classes in Rust and call them from Ruby without a big overhead of cross-language interaction.

## How we made Ruby talk to Rust

There a few different ways you can call Rust from Ruby:

* write a dynamic library in Rust with `extern "C"` interface and call it using FFI.

> * write a dynamic library, but use Ruby API to register methods, so that you can call them from Ruby directly, just like any other Ruby code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* write a dynamic library, but use the Ruby API to register methods, so that you can call them from Ruby directly, just like any other Ruby code.
```

> First approach, using FFI would require us to come up with some custom C like interfaces in both Rust and Ruby and then create wrappers for them in both languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first approach, using FFI would require us to come up with some custom C like interfaces in both Rust and Ruby and then create wrappers for them in both languages.
```

> The second approach, using Ruby API, sounded more promising, as there were already libraries to make our lives easier:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second approach, using the Ruby API, sounded more promising, as there were already libraries to make our lives easier:
```

> * ruru/rutie

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [ruru](https://github.com/d-unseductable/ruru) and [rutie](https://github.com/danielpclark/rutie)
```

> * Helix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Helix](https://github.com/tildeio/helix)
```

> We tried Helix first: it has macros which look like writing Ruby in Rust, which was a bit more magical for us than we found comfortable;

Reviewer 2: I think it would be clearer to get rid of the semi-colons and include this as a bullet poined list.

> The Coercion Protocol wasn't well documented and it wasn't clear how would you go about passing non-primitive ruby objects into Helix' methods;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Coercion Protocol wasn't well documented and it wasn't clear how would you go about passing non-primitive ruby objects into Helix methods;
```

> We were not sure about the safety - it looked like Helix didn't call ruby methods using `rb_protect`, which could lead to an undefined behavior;

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the `rb_protect` documentation, as most people won't know what it is.

I think we should also clarify:

> which could lead to undefined behavior if a Ruby exception was thrown after the Rust code had called back into Ruby.

(note: no "an" before undefined behavior)

> Eventually, we decided to go with ruru/rutie, but keep ruby layer thin and isolated so that we could possibly switch in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eventually, we decided to go with ruru/rutie. We tried to keep the Ruby layer thin and isolated from the rest of our application, so that we could possibly switch in the future.
```

> [Rutie](https://crates.io/crates/rutie) is a fork of [Ruru](https://crates.io/crates/ruru) (it looks like ruru's development had stagnated, and it wasn't accepting new PRs).

Reviewer 2: The word "stagnated" sounds a bit accustatory towards the maintainers of Ruru. Maybe just say "We decided to use Rutie, a recent fork of Ruru which has more active development".

Here's a small example of how you can create a class with one method in ruru/rutie:

```rust
#[macro_use]
extern crate rutie;

use rutie::{Class, Object, RString};

class!(HelloWorld);
methods!(
    HelloWorld,
    _itself,

    fn hello(name: RString) -> RString {
        RString::new(format!("Hello {}", name.unwrap().to_string()))
    }
);

#[allow(non_snake_case)]
#[no_mangle]
pub extern "C" fn Init_ruby_rust_demo() {
    let mut class = Class::new("RubyRustDemo", None);
    class.define(|itself| itself.def_self("hello", hello) );
}
```

> It's great if all you need is to pass some basic types (like String, Fixnum, Boolean, etc.) to your methods, but not that great if you need to pass a lot of data. In that case, you can pass the whole object, say `Order` and then you would need to call each field you need on that object to move it into Rust:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's great if all you need is to pass some basic types (like `String`, `Fixnum`, `Boolean`, etc.) to your methods, but not that great if you need to pass a lot of data. In that case, you can pass the whole object, say `Order` and then you would need to call each field you need on that object to move it into Rust:
```

    }

    fn error_message() -> &'static str {
        "Not a valid request"
    }
}

methods!(
    // .. some code skipped

    fn hello(user: AnyObject) -> Boolean {
        let name = user.send("name").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let ruby_address = user.send("address");
        let country = ruby_address.send("country").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let city = ruby_address.send("city").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let address = Address {
            country,
            city
        };
        let rust_user = RustUser {
            name,
            address
        };
        do_something_with_user(&rust_user);
        Boolean::new(true)
    }
)
```

You can see a lot of routine and repetitive code here, there's also missing proper error handling.
After looking at this code, it reminded us that this looks a lot like some manual parsing of something like JSON or similar.
You _could_ instead serialize objects in Ruby to JSON and then parse it in Rust, and it works mostly OK, but you still need to implement JSON serializers in Ruby.

> But then we were curious, what if we implement `serde` deserializer for `AnyObject` itself: it will take ruties's `AnyObject` and go over each field defined in the type and call the corresponding method on that ruby object to get it's value. And it worked!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then we were curious, what if we implement `serde` deserializer for `AnyObject` itself: it will take ruties's `AnyObject` and go over each field defined in the type and call the corresponding method on that ruby object to get it's value. It worked!
```

Starting sentences with "but" and "and" feels odd.

Here's the same method, but using our serde deserializer & serializer:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize)]
pub struct User {
    pub name: String,
    pub address: Address,
}

#[derive(Debug, Deserialize)]
pub struct Address {
    pub country: String,
    pub city: String
}

class!(HelloWorld);
rutie_serde_methods!(
    HelloWorld,
    _itself,
    ruby_class!(Exception),

    // Notice that the argument has our defined type `User`, and the return type is plain bool
    fn hello_user(user: User) -> bool {
        do_something_with_user(&user);
        true
    }
);

```

You can see how much simpler the code in `hello_user` is now - we don't need to parse `user` manually anymore.
Since it's serde, it can also handle nested objects (as you can see with the address).

> We also added a built-in error handling: if serde fails to "parse" the object, this macro will raise an exception of a class that we provided (`Exception` in this case).

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mentioning that we took great care to catch panics from Rust too? This wasn't something available in Ruru.

Using [rutie-serde](https://crates.io/crates/rutie-serde/) we could quickly and painlessly implement thin interfaces between ruby and rust.

## Moving from Ruby to Rust

We came up with a plan to gradually replace all parts of the Ruby dispatcher with Rust.
We started by replacing with Rust classes which didn't have dependencies on other parts of the dispatcher and adding feature flags,
something similar to this:

```ruby
module TravelTime
  def self.get(from_location, to_location, options)
    if rust_enabled? && Feature.enabled?(:rust_travel_time) # in the real world the feature flag would be more granular and enable you to A/B test
        RustTravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)
    else
        RubyTravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)
    end
  end
end
```

> There was also a **master switch** (in this case `rust_enabled?`), which allowed us to switch all the Rust code off by flipping just one feature flag.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention we had tooling to automatically flip this?

Since the API of both Ruby and Rust classes implementations remained largely the same, we were able to test both of them using the same tests, which gave us more confidence in the quality of the implementation.

```ruby
RSpec.describe TravelTime do
  shared_examples "travel_time" do
    let(:from_location) { build(:location) }
    let(:to_location) { build(:location) }
    let(:options) { build(:travel_time_options) }

    it 'returns correct travel time' do
      expect(TravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)).to eq(123.45)
    end
  end

  context "ruby implementation" do
    before do
      Feature.disable!(:rust_travel_time)
    end

    include "travel_time"
  end

  context "rust implementation" do
    before do
      Feature.enable!(:rust_travel_time)
    end

    include "travel_time"
  end
end
```

> When we moved all the dependencies of some larger part of the code into Rust, we could then move the code which was relying on those dependencies:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what these two paragraphs and the subsequent example are trying to show. I think we could just remove them and keep the "it was important that..." sentence at the end of this section?

If your `BigModule` had dependencies on `A`, `B`, `C`, where `A` was also dependent on `D`, you would move `D`, then  `A`, and also `B`, `C`, which would be called by `BigModule` from ruby:

```ruby
class BigModule
  def call
    # each of these will call either Ruby or Rust depending on the feature flag
    A.call
    B.call
    C.call
  end
end
```
After `A`, `B`, `C` was moved to rust, it was possible to move `BigModule` itself to rust:

```rust
struct BigModule {
    a: A,
    b: B,
    c: C,
}

impl BigModule {
    pub fn call(&self) -> Result<SomeResult> {
        self.a.call();
        self.b.call();
        self.c.call();
        Ok(some_result)
    }
    //
}
```

Obviously, each of these `call` methods would probably take some arguments and return some results, which `BigModule` would use.

It was also very important that, at any time, we could switch off the Rust integration and the dispatcher would still work (because we kept the Ruby implementation along with Rust and kept adding feature flags).

> ## How performance was improved

Reviewer 2: People often scan blogs rather than reading them properly, so it helps if the headings are short and concise:

```suggestion
## Performance Improvements
```

When moving more larger chunks of code into Rust, we noticed increased performance improvements which we were carefully monitoring.

> When moving smaller modules to Rust (such as travel time), we didn't expect much improvement: in fact, the code might have become slower because of the interaction overhead (we call travel time model hundreds of thousands of times during the dispatch cycle). But after we moved larger modules the performance improvements were obvious.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When moving smaller modules to Rust, we didn't expect much improvement: in fact, some code became slower because it was being called in tight loops, and there was a small overhead to calling Rust code from the Ruby application.
```

I'm not sure the example of the travel time model makes this eaiser to follow.

### Performance numbers

In the dispatcher, there are 3 main phases of the dispatch cycle:

* loading data
* running computation, calculating assignments
* saving/sending assignments

> Loading data and saving data phases scale pretty much linearly depending on the dataset size, while computation phase (which we moved to Rust) has an higher-order polynomial component in it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Loading data and saving data phases scale pretty much linearly depending on the dataset size, while computation phase (which we moved to Rust) has a higher-order polynomial component in it.
```

> We are less worried about the loading/saving data phases, and we didn't prioritise speeding up those phases yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are less worried about the loading/saving data phases, and we haven't prioritised speeding up those phases yet.
```

> While still having loading data and sending data back parts of the dispatcher written in Ruby, total dispatch time was significantly reduced: for example, total dispatch time in one of our larger zones dropped from ~4 sec to 0.8 sec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While still having loading data and sending data back parts of the dispatcher written in Ruby, total dispatch time was significantly reduced: for example, total dispatch time in one of our larger geographic areas dropped from ~4 sec to 0.8 sec.
```

What's a zone? We also don't want to leak the fact that we dispatch per zone.

<figure>
![Total dispatch time](/images/posts/moving-from-ruby-to-rust/total_dispatch_time.png)
</figure>

Out of those 0.8 seconds, roughly 0.2 seconds were spent in Rust, in the computation phase. This means 0.6 second is a Ruby/DB overhead of loading data and sending assignments to riders. It looks like the dispatch cycle is only 5 times quicker now, but actually, the computation phase in this example time was reduced from ~3.4sec to 0.2sec, which is 17x speedup.

<figure>
![Computation phase time](/images/posts/moving-from-ruby-to-rust/computation_time.png)
</figure>

Keep in mind, that Rust code is almost a 1:1 copy of the Ruby in terms of the implementation, and we didn't add any additional optimisations (like caching, avoiding copying memory in some cases), so there is still room for the improvement.

## Conclusion

> Our project of moving from Ruby to Rust was a success and we achieved what we have expected. Because of the gradual migration and having the ability to quickly switch between the implementations, we mitigated most of the risks and it allowed us to deliver this rewrite in smaller parts and under the feature flags, just like any other feature that we build normally in Deliveroo.

Reviewer 2: I'd sell our achievements more in this section:

> Our project was successful: moving from Ruby to Rust was a success that dramatically sped up our dipatch process, and gave us more head-room in which we could try implementing more advanced algorithms.
> 
> The gradual migration and careful feature flagging mitigated most of the risks of the project. We were able to deliver it in smaller, incremental parts, just like any other feature that we normally build in Deliveroo.
